The pitfalls of request/response over messaging (#308)
mauroservienti/milestone.github.io: _posts/pitfalls-of-request-response-over-messaging.md

## Request/response over messaging

Given its popularity and success, using request/response over messaging is very tempting. The idea might get more traction if we look into the scalability capabilities of a message-based architecture. The train of thought might be, "If messages scale out so well, it must be beneficial also when using request/response." Let me give you a couple of examples.

The application needs to query data to fulfill a business requirement. Queries are usually synchronous. Synchronicity implies that the system demands resources when the query happens. What if we send the query definition to a remote service using a message and wait for a response?

Similarly, the authentication request is synchronous when a user logs in to the system. The more users try to log in simultaneously, the more the authentication component will be a bottleneck. What if we could securely send credentials using a message to a remote authentication component and wait for a response?

## Once upon a time, there were two generals

> Sending a message to a remote service for asynchronous processing is appealing. However, we must be careful. [Only the famous lady is sure that all that glitters is gold](https://youtu.be/Ly6ZhQVnVow). In the distributed system world, proof of receiving is a renowned problem, hard, if possible, to solve. The following story represents it well:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sending a message to a remote service for asynchronous processing is appealing. However, we must be careful. [Only the famous lady is sure that all that glitters is gold](https://youtu.be/Ly6ZhQVnVow). In the distributed system world, proof of receiving is a renowned problem, hard, if not impossible, to solve. The following story represents it well:
```

Source: [The Two Generals' Problem—Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Two_Generals%27_Problem)

In both the above-presented scenarios, the sign-in process and the need to query for data, we are in the same situation as the two generals. The sender sends a message to the endpoint that's supposed to process that message and respond. However, there is no guarantee the message gets delivered or understood.

For the sake of the discussion, let's assume that delivery is guaranteed. Messages will arrive at the destination no matter what. That's the only assumption the sender can make. Receivers have a plethora of error conditions to choose from before being able to process incoming messages and reply to senders successfully. Even if that is successful, senders might still fail to process the reply.

## In a broader sense, messaging is unreliable

> Watcha talkin' bout, Mauro? (Cit. — <https://youtu.be/Le6qeMe7-vM>)

Reviewer: Something to check if you haven't already: Make sure the link is visible in Markdown within the `< >` brackets

> I'm sorry, that's another overloaded term, another instance of the [linguistic limitations](https://milestone.topics.it/2021/09/15/linguistic-limitation.html) we're facing.

> We use to refer to reliable messaging in contrast to unreliable ones. That's usually in the context of queuing systems. For example, RabbitMQ has the concept of [Publisher Confirms](https://www.rabbitmq.com/confirms.html#publisher-confirms). If they are off, the broker acknowledges the send operation upon it receives the message. It makes the broker extremely fast, with the risk that if it fails to write the sent message to disk, it's lost. That's unreliable messaging. There are scenarios in which it makes sense. To turn it into reliable messaging, we enable publisher confirms. The broker will acknowledge requests only upon successfully processing them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We use to refer to reliable messaging in contrast to unreliable ones. That's usually in the context of queuing systems. For example, RabbitMQ has the concept of [Publisher Confirms](https://www.rabbitmq.com/confirms.html#publisher-confirms). If they are off, the broker acknowledges the send operation when it receives the message. It makes the broker extremely fast, with the risk that if it fails to write the sent message to disk, it's lost. That's unreliable messaging. There are scenarios in which it makes sense. To turn it into reliable messaging, we enable publisher confirms. The broker will acknowledge requests only upon successfully processing them.
```
